---
title: AI, Automation, & the Economy
date: "April 29, 2023"
description: "Addressing the widening skills gap and deepening economic 
inequality caused by the increasing use of AI and automation, this article 
emphasizes the significance of labor representation and policy interventions 
for a more equitable future of work."
location: Tempe, Arizona
cover: economy.webp
coverSrc: The Prospect in New York, Harper’s Weekly
---

One issue that is of particular concern today is the widening skills gap and
economic inequality caused by the increasing use of AI and automation
technologies. As we continue to develop and deploy these technologies, it is
becoming clear that they have the potential to displace low-skill workers while
creating new opportunities in high-skill areas. In the midst of this, inadequate
labor representation continues to be a rising concern. The current system in
place doesn’t let the people affected have a voice in this issue. All of this,
in turn, can lead to a widening of the skills gap and increased economic
inequality.

The problem here is larger than one would think. The impact of increasing use of
AI and automation technologies on the job market has significant social and
economic implications. The potential displacement of low-skill jobs can result
in significant consequences for individuals, families, and communities,
particularly those who may already be vulnerable or marginalized. The creation
of new job opportunities in high-skill areas may require workers to acquire
additional education and training, which may be difficult or inaccessible for
some workers. Furthermore, the widening skills gap and economic inequality
resulting from this issue can have broader societal implications ultimately
leading to societal unrest.

Large sections of people are involved in this. The stakeholders in this issue
include these workers who may be affected by the displacement of low-skill jobs
and the need to acquire new skills, as well as employers who may benefit from
the use of AI and automation technologies. At stake are the livelihoods and
economic security of workers who may be affected by the displacement of
low-skill jobs and the need to acquire new skills for high-skill jobs.
Additionally, the ability of communities to adapt to the changing job market and
provide support for affected workers is at stake. The long-term health and
stability of the economy is also a stake, as the displacement of low-skill jobs
and the widening skills gap can have negative impacts on productivity,
innovation, and overall economic growth.

More recently, even some high-skill areas are beginning to notice the effect of
AI being able to do what experienced specialists have done for many years. This
can, in turn, lead to displacement of some high-skilled jobs too. On the other
hand, the development and deployment of AI and automation technologies require
workers with specialized skills in areas such as computer science, engineering,
and data analysis, thus creating new job opportunities in these high skill areas
while leaving behind workers who do not possess these skills. Additionally, the
automation of tasks that are repetitive and predictable, which are often found
in low-skill jobs such as data entry, can displace workers and contribute to
unemployment and underemployment. The effects of this issue are far-reaching and
significant. On an individual level, workers who are displaced by automation may
face financial insecurity and struggle to find new employment opportunities that
provide a similar level of income and stability. This can lead to increased
stress and anxiety, as well as potential health issues (Ananat et al., 2017)[^1]. On a societal level, the widening skills gap and economic inequality
can lead to a lack of social mobility and decreased opportunities for those who
are left behind. Without the labor representation in place, the disparity would
continue to increase without the workers ever getting a chance to upskill.

The significance of this argument is to improve the general understanding of the
potential consequences of this trend. It is, therefore, important to understand
the scale of this problem first. A study by Frey and Osborne (2017)[^2] examined
the potential impact of automation on the US job market and found that up to 47%
of jobs may be at risk of being automated in the coming decades. The authors
note that this trend is likely to affect workers across a wide range of
industries and skill levels, and may require significant policy interventions to
mitigate the potential negative consequences. By highlighting the causal
relationship between the increasing use of AI and automation technologies and
the displacement of low-skill jobs and economic inequality, we can better
understand the potential social and economic implications of this issue. This
can inform policy decisions, guide educational and workforce development
initiatives, and support affected workers in adapting to the changing job
market.

Research has highlighted the potential consequences of automation and AI for the
job market and broader society. For example, a study by Acemoglu and Restrepo
(2019)[^3] found that the increasing use of robots in manufacturing and related
industries has led to significant job displacement and wage stagnation,
particularly for workers with lower levels of education. The authors argue that
this trend may contribute to a widening gap in income and wealth inequality.

Furthermore, the increasing use of AI and automation technologies may have
differential impacts on various demographic groups, exacerbating existing social
and economic disparities. For instance, research has shown that marginalized
communities, including minority groups and individuals with low educational
attainment, may be disproportionately affected by the displacement of low-skill
jobs. Ananat et al. (2017)[^1] highlighted that job loss resulting from
automation can contribute to widening inequality, as those who are already
economically disadvantaged may face increased challenges in finding alternative
employment opportunities. This can further widen disparities in wealth, income,
and access to education, thus perpetuating cycles of poverty and social
inequality.

Moreover, the potential consequences of AI and automation on the job market may
also have implications for mental health and well-being. As individuals face job
displacement or uncertainty, without having a say in the situation, the stress
and anxiety associated with economic insecurity can impact their mental health,
leading to increased rates of depression, anxiety, and other mental health
disorders. This can have long-term consequences not only for individuals but
also for their families, communities, and the broader society.

Better labor representation is crucial in addressing the potential consequences
of this trend. Workers and their representatives must be included in the
conversation around AI and automation to ensure that their voices are heard and
their rights protected. This can help to lower the negative consequences of
automation, such as job displacement, and ensure that the benefits of
technological progress are shared more equitably. Better representation would
ultimately lead to development of upskilling programs for assisting workers in
transitioning careers. It is also important to focus on the perspective of
younger generations who will be most affected by the impact of AI and automation
on the job market. This includes understanding the changing nature of work, the
skills needed to succeed in the new economy, and the potential social and
economic implications of these trends for younger workers.

The causal argument regarding the impact of AI and automation on the job market
is significant because it provides the consequences of this trend and highlights
the need for policy interventions to support affected workers and communities.
In conclusion, the widening skills gap and economic inequality caused by the
increasing use of AI and automation technologies is an issue that deserves
attention from stakeholders across various fields. Better labor representation
and the development of suitable training programs is also necessary. By
understanding the causes and effects of this issue, we can work to develop
strategies to promote social mobility and ensure that the benefits of these
technologies are shared more equitably across society. Finally, more research is
needed to predict how economic inequality is going to set in as a result of the
impact of AI and automation on the job market. This includes examining the
potential impact of automation on different industries and occupations, as well
as considering the broader social and economic implications of these trends.

[^1]:
    Ananat, E. O., Gassman-Pines, A., Francis, D. V., & Gibson-Davis, C. M.
    (2017). Linking job loss, inequality, mental health, and education. Science,
    356(6343), 1127-1128.
    [^2]: Frey, C. B., & Osborne, M. A. (2017). The future of employment: How
    susceptible are jobs to computerisation?. Technological forecasting and
    social change, 114, 254-280.
    [^3]: Acemoglu, D., & Restrepo, P. (2019). Automation and new tasks: How
    technology displaces and reinstates labor. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
    33(2), 3-30.
